Title: Implementation Guide: Automated File Delivery Pipeline (ADLS Gen2 to Email)
Status: APPROVED | Target Audience: Engineers & DevOps
ℹ️ CORE CAPABILITY: AUTOMATED FILE DELIVERY PIPELINE (ADLS GEN2 TO EMAIL)

Objective: Establish a direct, event-driven link between the cloud data store and downstream consumer email boxes.

Automation Boundary: The pipeline operates independently of scheduled batch processing. The arrival of a physical file in the ADLS container acts as the sole required execution signal.

Target State: Replaces manual file downloads, cross-network data migrations, and Outlook attachment tasks with a zero-touch Azure workflow.

🛡️ CROSS-SERVICE SECURITY: ENCRYPTED EMAIL VIA LOGIC APPS FROM ADF

Orchestration Split: Azure Data Factory acts strictly as the Data Processor and Trigger Listener. It handles no email distribution. Azure Logic Apps acts exclusively as the Data Deliverer and SMTP Interface.

The Network Handoff: ADF initiates communication by making an outbound HTTP POST web request containing a structured JSON package. This handoff travels across the secure Microsoft Global Backbone Network using TLS 1.2 encryption.

Credential Isolation: The Logic App authenticates with the Office 365 Exchange server using a User-Assigned Managed Identity. This eliminates any storage of service account passwords, tokens, or credentials within the pipeline definition or code repository.

1. Prerequisites & Environment Setup
Before building the pipeline, ensure the following foundational items are provisioned and permissions are assigned:

Azure Resources Required
Azure Data Lake Storage (ADLS) Gen2 Account (containing the target landing container/folder).

Azure Data Factory (ADF) Instance (V2).

Azure Logic App (Consumption or Standard tier).

User-Assigned Managed Identity (UMI).

Security & Access Control (IAM)
Assign the following permissions to your User-Assigned Managed Identity to allow access across the services:

On the ADLS Gen2 Account: Assign the Storage Blob Data Reader role to the UMI so ADF can read the raw file content.

On the Synapse/SQL Workspace (If scaling is tied to this architecture): Assign the SQL DB Contributor role.

On the Logic App: Go to Identity > User Assigned and add the UMI to give the Logic App access to this identity block.

2. Configuration Flow
Follow these sequential setup steps to establish the technical handshake.

Step 1: The Logic App Blueprint (The Receiver)
The Logic App must be configured first so that it generates the HTTP POST URL required by ADF.

Create a blank Logic App and add the When an HTTP request is received trigger.

Use the following Request Body JSON Schema to tell the Logic App exactly how to map the incoming data fields:

JSON
{
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "fileName": { "type": "string" },
        "fileContent": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
                "$content-type": { "type": "string" },
                "$content": { "type": "string" }
            }
        }
    }
}
Add the Send an email (V2) - Office 365 Outlook action.

In the Attachments section, set the fields dynamically:

Attachment Name: Use the token fileName from the trigger.

Attachment Content: Switch to the expression editor and use:
base64ToBinary(triggerBody()?['fileContent']?['$content'])

Save the Logic App. Copy the generated HTTP POST URL from the trigger block.

Step 2: The ADF Storage Event Trigger (The Listener)
This component automates the execution loop based on file availability.

In ADF, create a new Storage Event Trigger.

Select your ADLS Gen2 Storage Account and the specific container/folder path you want to watch.

Set the Event type to Blob created.

In the trigger parameter mapping section, bind the file metadata to your pipeline parameters:

Pipeline Parameter FileName: @trigger().outputs.body.fileName

Pipeline Parameter FolderPath: @trigger().outputs.body.folderPath

Step 3: The ADF Retrieval Activity
Add a Get File Content activity to your pipeline canvas.

Connect it to an ADLS Gen2 dataset. Use the pipeline parameters to construct the dynamic file path: @dataset().FolderPath and @dataset().FileName.

Open the Settings tab of this activity and check Secure Output. This ensures the data read from the lake is masked inside the monitoring logs.

Step 4: The ADF Web Activity Handoff
Add a Web Activity to the canvas and link it downstream from the Get File Content activity.

Configure the settings:

URL: Paste the HTTP POST URL copied from your Logic App in Step 1.

Method: POST

Body: Paste the following code snippet:

JSON
{
    "fileName": "@{pipeline().parameters.FileName}",
    "fileContent": {
        "$content-type": "application/octet-stream",
        "$content": "@{base64(activity('GetFileContent').output.Response)}"
    }
}
Open the Settings tab of the Web Activity and check Secure Input. This prevents the data package from being leaked inside the outbound HTTP logs.

3. Operational Constraints & Thresholds
When planning a deployment with this setup, maintain awareness of these platform limits:

Payload Boundary: The ADF Web Activity imposes a strict 4 MB limit on request sizes.

Encoding Expansion: Base64 encoding introduces an approximate 33% expansion to the data footprint.

Maximum Stable File Size: To prevent processing failures or data truncation, source files routed through this specific pipeline must remain under 2.5 MB.

Large File Strategy: For assets exceeding this file size, architecture dictates that the pattern should shift: ADF passes only the folder metadata path, and the Logic App uses a native connection to pull data directly from the storage layer.
